---
title: How to test your DOM by being resilient to design changes ?
author: alban@sogilis.com
date: 2019-12-13
image: /img/2019/12/data-test.jpeg
categories:
  - DÉVELOPPEMENT
tags:
  - Js
  - VueJs
  - Jest
  - test
---

*For the article the technical stack used is Vue.js front-end framework and Jest testing framework*

## Let’s introduce the problem by an example

We have a button to go to the previous page.

{{< highlight html >}}
<div class="btn-arrow" @click="goToPreviousPage">
    Back
</div>
{{< /highlight >}}

And the unit test:

{{< highlight js >}}
it('goes to the previous page when back button is clicked', () => {
	// mock goToPreviousPage method
	wrapper.vm.goToPreviousPage = jest.fn()

	wrapper.find('.btn-arrow').trigger('click')

	expect(wrapper.vm.goToPreviousPage).toHaveBeenCalled()
})
{{< /highlight >}}

Now we want to change the design by replacing `.btn-arrow` to `.btn-link` css class.  
The design can also change by adding tag like `div`, `a`, `span` etc..

{{< highlight html >}}
<div class="btn-link" @click="goToPreviousPage">
	Back
</div>
{{< /highlight >}}

But now, our test is red because the css selector is `undefined` while the functionality still works.

## Solution 
The solution to be resilient to this kind of changes is to introduce HTML `data-*` attributes in your DOM.

Let’s take the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) definition:

> Custom data attributes are intended to store custom data private to the page or application, for which there are no more appropriate attributes or elements.

We can add to our HTML a `data-test` attribute to test our DOM.

{{< highlight html >}}
<div class="btn-link" data-test-action="previous-page" @click="goToPreviousPage">
	Back
</div>
{{< /highlight >}}

{{< highlight js "hl_lines=5">}}
it('goes to the previous page when back button is clicked', () => {
	// mock goToPreviousPage method
	wrapper.vm.goToPreviousPage = jest.fn()

	wrapper.find('[data-test-action="previous-page"]').trigger(‘click’)

	expect(wrapper.vm.goToPreviousPage).toHaveBeenCalled()
})
{{< /highlight >}}

Now our unit test has become resilient to design changes because we used data attribute as css selector.

## This tip has some drawbacks

* Bigger HTML, degraded readability.  
* Take time to add data attributes.

## See also

* W3C official definition: https://www.w3.org/TR/2011/WD-html5-20110525/elements.html#custom-data-attribute
* MDN explanations: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Howto/Use_data_attributes
* W3Schools summary: https://www.w3schools.com/tags/att_data-.asp

**Alban Bertolini**

Special thanks to Jean-Baptiste, Yann, Nasser and Julio for their feedbacks.
